Hello,
and welcome to today's episode of Rawkode Live.
I'm your host, Rawkode.
Today, we are taking a look at multi
tenancy on Kubernetes through a project called vCluster.
Now before we get started on that, there's
just a little bit of housekeeping.
First and foremost, please subscribe to the channel,
like the video, click the bell.
This will keep you up to date with
all new episodes of Rawkode Live. It will
also encourage the YouTube algorithm to share this
content with the broader cloud native ecosystem.
We also have a Discord channel available at
Rawkode.chat.
If you wanna request new technologies to appear
on the show or talk about any existing
or previous episode, that is the best place
to do so. Feel free to jump in
there and join the conversation.
Alright. Now for today, for vCluster,
I am joined by two fantastic guests, Rich
and Lucas. Hi there both. How are you?
Hey, really good.
Awesome. Thanks for having us.
It's my pleasure. I'm really excited to take
a look at vCluster today. It's kicker tires
on it, seaboard is capable of and share
that with everyone that is watching. Can we
just take a few moments, please? If you
both introduce yourselves, tell us a little bit
about you, and then we'll talk about vCluster.
And I'll throw it to you first, Rich.
Yeah. So I'm a senior developer advocate at
Loft Labs.
I've been with the company for about three
months now, and I'm really enjoying it.
I've been in DevRel for a few years
now, but have a long,
long
history of different kinds of ops roles before
that,
sys admin roles, SRE, all kinds of stuff
over the years. So
yeah.
And Lucas?
Yeah. Hi. I'm Lucas,
CEO at Loft Labs. I brought Rich in
a couple months ago and super excited to
be working with him. And we launched vCluster
a couple of weeks ago, and, you know,
I'm trying to hop on as many
streams and calls as possible to to, you
know, tell people more about what we're up
to right now.
Awesome. Thank you. And thank you, Noel, for
telling us my audio was on during that
video. After I assure everyone that that is
not the case, I guess I made a
mistake. Sorry about that.
Oh, I guess I missed an opportunity to
plug my thing, which is that I also
do a podcast about Kubernetes called KubeCuddle.
So if you just search in your podcast
player for that, you should find it.
Don't you worry. I was I was gonna
mention kubectl anyway. I'm a big fan. It's
a great podcast, and I encourage everyone to
check it out.
Alright. Let's start then with a little tldr
on what vCluster is. Which one of you
would like to tackle that?
I'll start off.
So vCluster is
basically
a solution to the pain of Kubernetes multitenancy.
So
if you have used Kubernetes for a while,
you have probably run into
the the situation where you're using namespace based
isolation,
and there are things you just can't do.
Right? You can't manage cluster wide resources
as a user in a namespace.
And so
this is actually something that was built into
our commercial product, Loft,
and then we kinda pulled it out and
open sourced it recently.
Lucas, is there more you wanna share?
Yeah. I think
I mean, that that was a great great
intro. I think you said pretty much everything
except, you know, vCluster
is just
is more than just
multitenancy.
It's really just an efficient way to also
create self-service
for
for, you know, Kubernetes clusters.
Because, you know, as soon as you have
access just to a namespace, you can basically
now spin up your own Kubernetes clusters. I
mean, they are virtual. They don't have their
own, you know, VMs and nodes.
But with this restricted access, you can essentially
make yourself cluster admin for, you know, this
virtual cluster, which is,
you know, something that people often forget when
they think about virtual cluster, and I think
it's actually one of the most exciting parts.
And, I mean, in terms of the technical
end of it, you know, you've got a
namespace on the host cluster,
and inside of it, there's a k three
s API server.
And that
is basically your Kubernetes API, you know, within
your vCluster. So it looks to the user
like it's a full blown Kubernetes cluster.
So what are some of the, like, more
common use cases for this? What do you
see people adopting vCluster to do beyond, like,
just multi tenancy? Is there, like, a broader
picture there?
I think that a little bit into the
details. Oh, sorry. Just go ahead. No. Go
ahead. I I I was just gonna say,
I think, you know, there there are a
number of use cases, but to me, probably
the most interesting one is,
you know, Lucas mentioned self-service,
and I think, you know, this is great
for dev environments. You know?
If you don't wanna have,
you know, different clusters spun up for different
teams,
you want people to be able to do
self-service and just get on with their work
as they need to.
I I think that that's one of the
better use cases.
CICD is potentially another use case. You know?
So instead of using something like kind
and having to provision something, you know, every
time you run a set of tests,
you basically are just leveraging this cluster that's
already there and and, you know, just creating
a name space on it, which I think
is is likely a lot faster.
Yeah. Definitely. I think,
you know, just you're mentioning those use cases
there and thinking about how, you know, CICD
is one of those things that when you
run it in your cluster, it normally needs
quite a lot of privilege. Like it does
some magic stuff. This is the building container
images and it's access to the like host
paths or it needs, know, service accounts with
maybe quite broad
permissions. And if you could toast all of
that in a virtual cluster, you're kind of
protecting the outer layer but giving them you
know, you're not slowing down developers and I
guess that's almost a superpower to a point
and that the development team can now just
work with whatever permissions they need without having
to constantly
come back to the operations team or the
maintenance teams, SRE teams and go, hey, I
need this new permission or I need this.
Yeah. And I think that
I think CICD is really tricky, right? Because
if you're in a situation where you run
a lot of tests and they take a
while, there's always that trade off, you know,
where you're trying to reduce how how long
the tests take, and you're trying to do
everything that you can to sort of, you
know, shrink that amount of time before the
developers get feedback. And, you know, you're often,
you know, making trade offs. Like, do I
wanna have a a VM with a cluster
already baked into it? You know? Or do
I wanna provision a cluster every time?
And there are pluses and minuses to both
of those things. You know? The more that
you bake in,
the more that you have to deal with,
like, you know, recreating images or updating them
somehow.
And, you know, if you provision stuff on
the fly, then you've gotta wait for all
of that to happen. You know? And so
the
the thing the situation that I think we've
gotten into with the Kubernetes multitenancy problems is
this cluster sprawl, you know, where people feel
like it's easier to just make a new
cluster for everything
than to think about dealing with multitenancy.
You know? And and that's really, I think,
a a lot of what we're trying to
address with this tool.
Wow. Big mission.
I'm looking forward to check it out. But
it sounds amazing and I think there's just
you're right. There are so many different use
cases. I like the CICD one. That one
hadn't really occurred to me until you mentioned
it. And then the minute you said it,
it was like a little late switch. I
was like, oh, yeah. He's totally right. Like,
it's a great use case.
Is vCluster something We have a actually Sorry.
I didn't go rich. Oh, I was just
gonna say, David, we've got a really big
announcement today. Do you wanna talk about that,
Lucas?
Oh, yeah. Sure.
Yeah. We're we're actually breaking the news as
of right now in in this call.
So vCluster
is now a certified Kubernetes distribution.
So one of the I think there's, like,
80 distributions out there, and we worked pretty
hard on the, you know, past couple of
weeks to pass all the conformance tests that
CNCF put out there for certified distributions.
And, yeah, pretty happy to report that they
merged our pre request now. We're not the
logo does not show up on the website
yet. That's to come hopefully in the next
couple of days, so this is really, like,
breaking news.
But super happy to report that. Yeah. That
is a big deal. Congratulations.
That that's that's awesome. It's a fully conforming
Kubernetes cluster running inside of a namespace on
a Kubernetes cluster. Cluster.
Yeah. We have to give a shout out
to our
have to give a shout out to our
CTO and cofounder,
Fabian Cram too, who has built a lot
of this.
He
he's just a machine.
He just codes like crazy and build such
cool things. He's probably on it right now.
So I'm assuming there was maybe a couple
of things you had to to to pass
the conformance test. Is there are any of
those quite funny that you wanna share with
us? Anything that snuck through?
Yeah. I think I think the most most
tricky part was actually getting things done in
terms of notes because, you know, Kubernetes has
certain
restrictions regarding you know, if you're thinking about
a a virtual cluster that runs inside a
namespace,
what happens to the notes? Right?
Do you see all the notes in your
underlying cluster?
Do you only see the notes that you
actually have workloads running on?
Do you only see, like, notes for certain
note selector and all these kind of things?
So, yeah, we had to we had to
add a couple of flags to, you know,
essentially enable certain configurations
to, you know, sync all notes from the
underlying cluster and things like that because, you
know, that made it much easier to run
these tests that that, you know, the conformance
tests essentially require.
Awesome.
Yeah. I hadn't again, I hadn't really thought
of that. What I would expect get nodes
to return inside of a vCluster.
I guess based on what you just said,
that's it's all configurable then. So me is
the person deploying vCluster.
I I decide what what should come back
there. Right?
Yeah. Exactly. I mean, we we we're trying
to add as many, you know, config options
as possible. VCluster is actually pretty much I
mean, you can either just deploy a stateful
set, right, and a service, and that's vCluster.
You can basically run cube CTL apply. So
it's basically just what what arguments you provide
for the for the entry point
of the two containers. Right? We have a
k three s container,
and then we have the sync container
that actually does the synchronization
between what's inside the virtual cluster and what's
outside in the real cluster.
And, yeah, typically, you deploy it via Helm,
and we try to expose as much as
possible.
So, you know, there are so many different
use cases for virtual clusters. We talked to
one company that started using
our product to essentially,
you know, kinda simulate
clusters and simulate, you know, what happens. So
they wanted to test, like, what happens if
we run, like, 500 daemon sets. Right?
And, you know, our first five hundred nodes,
and then the question comes up, hey. Can
we actually produce fake notes with vCluster? So
that's something we're currently looking into. And, yeah,
there there's so many use cases that people
come up with. It's incredible.
And this is pretty new,
you know, in terms of the open source
project.
We just released it during KubeCon
publicly,
but but this is technology that our users
on our commercial product have been using for
a while. So it's actually a lot more
baked than you might think from, you know,
a brand new open source project.
Alright. Well, my interest is certainly peaked. So
why don't we get this deployed
to my cluster? And feel free to
share all of your experience and history of
the project as we go and I will
do my best not to mess this up
too much.
So I
have my screen here. This is the vCluster
documentation.
We're gonna work through the getting started guide
And if nothing has broken in the last
ten minutes,
we should have a cluster.
We do. Alright.
Step one. I'm assuming I just deploy
vCluster.
So
do I need the CLI? Is that
Yeah. It's gonna be much easier if you're
using the CLI. Well, I do like easy
mode, so let's do that.
Yeah. And, of course, you know, this is
a quick start, so it's not necessarily how
you would,
you know, productionize this, I guess. But
Oh,
yeah. That's that's alright. Quick start, sir. They're
more fun.
Mhmm. Deploying stuff to production is too hard.
I'll deal with that deal with that in
the future.
Okay.
So we have the vCluster CLI
and then step two is that we wanna
create a vCluster. I know it looks like
you offer let me zoom in on this
a little bit, multiple approaches to do this.
So
it feels like is the vCluster CLI just
optional? I can do this through Kubernetes
manifest, but like you said, the vCluster CLI
is gonna keep this really easy for me.
Okay. I see he's nodding. Yeah. Why I
mean, you'll you'll actually see the output in
the CLI and it essentially runs Helm under
the hood. So if you already have Helm
installed, you're gonna see the command on there.
Alright. So let's just copy this command
And this is vCluster create vCluster
one.
Okay. So this is just the name of
my virtual cluster.
And then this is the namespace to run
it in?
Yep. Okay. So do I need to create
that namespace first or is that created for
me as part of the vCluster create?
You just need to do the command and
Alright.
Let's see what happens.
It
worked? Is that it?
That's it. VCluster running now, hopefully.
So and and, again, when we were talking
about, you know, the speed difference, you know,
within a workflow like a CICD workflow or
something like that, This is literally just, you
know, deploying a couple containers
with a Helm chart.
Alright.
I mean, it's not supposed to be this
easy. I'm just gonna throw that out here.
Like
We can we can screw it up. I
didn't is this clustered?
I thought that this is Rawkode Live. Yeah.
Yeah. That's right. You're right. Although, I'm already
thinking that v vCluster can provide some pretty
interesting clustered scenarios so maybe another day.
Alright. Let's see what it's done to our
cluster then. I know I'm going off script,
don't know if the getting started guide is
gonna actually guide me through this but the
questions in my head are
what have you done to my cluster? So
I can see that namespace was created.
I
wanna see if we have anything running inside
of our namespace.
And it looks like we got
a core DNS running and a Rawkode live
zero. So that's the stateful set that Lucas
mentioned earlier.
Are those the only two modifications to my
cluster or is there something else?
You should see a service as well in
your cluster.
A service.
Yep. Oh, yeah. I mean, I guess two
services because it's a stateful set. You're also
gonna need the headless service. But yeah.
And then,
Eric, actually, what you see in terms of
DNS here,
that has already been deployed inside your vCluster
itself.
So that's kind of how you see how
things are met to the underlying cluster. So
everything you're creating inside the vCluster and the
first thing that vCluster does, it deploys DNS
to itself,
essentially,
is, you know, all the parts that are
being created and some of the services that
are being created inside the vCluster
will be synchronized down to your host namespace,
and that will be rewritten.
So you kinda see the cube systems or
the x cube system x here inside the
name
that actually shows you the namespace inside your
vCluster because we're mapping, you know, your 500
namespaces inside your vCluster
to a single namespace
inside your underlying cluster, essentially.
Alright. I wanna
digest this a little bit. I wanna make
sure I understand what's
happening here. So
I think the first thing I wanna make
clear to people is that if I run
pods instead of virtual cluster, those are still
just pods running on my host clusters. That's
correct. Right?
Yeah. Exactly.
So the cluster has no scheduler.
Yeah. So what it does is there's a
sinker that syncs those pods to the host
cluster. And so
as we as we get into it more
and, you know, you deploy something,
if you have something you can you can
run inside there, we can look at how
that looks.
Okay. I I I wanna clarify a few
more things before my
you know, that mind blowing emoji. Feel like
my head's gonna be doing that in a
minute. So
what we have in our Rawkode Live namespace
here, that I'm assuming that Rawkode Live stateful
set zero pod,
is that an API server?
Yes. I mean, there's a regular
k three s API server.
And, typically, it has a SQLite database, but
you could also you know, we expose all
the k three s flags, essentially. Right? So
you could essentially
use etcd as a back end, right, or
MySQL as a back end rather than SQLite.
But SQLite is the easiest and, you know,
quickest option for, you know, quick start, so
that's why that's the default option for us.
And then
you also have a controller manager.
It's all packaged in k three s essentially.
Right? That's kind of the power of k
three s packaging everything in that single binary.
And then the only thing that's missing in
terms of Kubernetes control control plane
is the scheduler.
Right? Because we don't have any separate nodes,
and we actually wanna, you know, deploy things
in our underlying cluster.
And instead of the,
you know, instead of the scheduler, we're using
a syncer. And that syncre monitors,
you know, what's happening inside the virtual cluster
and then synchronizes
resources
down to the host cluster to the same
namespace.
It rewrites certain things as you can see
with these partners, etcetera, you know, to provide
prevent naming conflicts because we're mapping to a
single namespace.
And on top of that, it synchronizes the
status of these objects back into the vCluster
so that if you're inside the vCluster,
you see, you know, image pull back off
and all these kind of statuses that your
pods can have, and it looks like a
regular cluster.
I was That's true. Mind blown emoji
when I started playing with this too. So
I definitely
get the feeling. It's it's super fun.
I I I think I've got a handle
on it now. So I'm gonna walk through
the life of a a pod on a
vCluster and if I get anything wrong, please
feel free to correct me.
But you know, you've got this KCS API
server running on the host cluster.
I
can add whatever
configurations to that I want through validating web
configurations, mutating web configurations. I can run my
own operators and controllers in it. I can
apply all my resources to it
and all of that just works and then
the magic sauce is the sinker then. So
it's just said in looking at the SQL
lite kind database in the KTS
and then propagating enough of that back to
the host cluster
to be able for the workloads to start
running, but then you also pull back through
the status updates from the host
cluster.
Does that ever lead to contention between what
the host cluster wants to do versus what
the KPS ever wants to do, or does
it just work very nicely and harmoniously?
Yeah. I mean, it works pretty nicely because
the responsibilities
are pretty isolated. Again, I mean, it's basically
just
a different kind of scheduler. Right? A scheduler
that instead of actually scheduling work scheduling workloads
is basically just copying workloads
to be handled by another scheduler.
That's what it's doing. I guess what I'm
thinking is like, if I have a
mutating web configuration
and the host cluster which is adding a
set of labels and then the host for
whatever reason has validating web hook which doesn't
allow those labels,
You then have to kinda navigate a little
bit of turbulence, but I think that is
so contrived that it probably just wouldn't happen.
But that's again, that's Yeah. I think it's
actually a super exciting scenario because, I mean,
that that's kind of the world where we're
coming from. You know, we we created vCluster.
Again, as which mentioned, was part of our
commercial product. Right? Our commercial product is essentially
provisioning
development environments in form of namespaces for engineering
teams
in a kind of self-service fashion. So, typically,
you have all these constraints that you just
mentioned. Right? You have network
policies. You have validating, mutating webhooks, etcetera. Whatever
your admin teams defines to, you know, security
operations of that shared multi tenant cluster that
a lot of the teams are, you know,
creating namespaces in now.
And then when you do that, you're restricting
your users.
And that's essentially what we think when we
were thinking about, hey. What if users need
to do things across namespaces?
Right? Now the network policy needs to be
adjusted for that particular use case. You know?
Are there things that we can do to
make those things easier? How can they deploy
their own CRDs?
You know, have their own controllers and work
on those kind of more advanced objects?
How can they mess around with r b,
you know, just because that should be part
of their, you know, helm chart that they
wanna, you know, check-in to get later on
or something like that.
And that's essentially you know, the answer to
those questions was vCluster
because you just need access to namespace, then
you deploy vCluster,
and now you're admin of that vCluster.
And, yes, you can add a lot of
things to that cluster. You can add, you
know, validating, mutation control, etcetera,
but you're still gonna be also validated and
mutated at the lower level. Right? That's actually
the beauty of this because, I mean, your
pop gets checked twice. Right? Because the syncor
connects to your underlying cluster
and basically does a QTTL request. Right? And
if that fails, you're gonna see that in
the status of the of the virtual cluster
as well. So it's transparent to the user.
Right?
But, yeah, I mean, there are different there
are more layers now that, you know, you
can add these, you know, constraints essentially.
Yeah. I guess that's almost a double edged
sword as well. I can imagine a situation
where people may think, I'll use the virtual
cluster so I can run containers as root,
but the host cluster may have a policy
that doesn't allow that. So not violating the
host policy, it's still gonna block it, but
at least they can try in the virtual
cluster,
which is quite interesting. I
like that.
Okay. Yeah. And I mean I mean, I
think as a as a user
I think as a user, you would wanna
get educated about what those policies are anyway.
Right? Oh, yeah. Because eventually,
the things that you're playing around with are
gonna hopefully, you know, land in production, and
you're gonna be under the same kind of
constraints.
Okay.
I'm curious. And instead of asking a question,
let's let's do something with our vCluster and
see what happens.
I'm assuming
and I know I should probably go back
to the docs. In fact, I will go
back to the docs. Unless it doesn't do
what I want to do next, in which
case I'll go off script again. But
oh, so we can do a connect.
That is gonna do it. Right? This is
what I was curious about.
When I connect to the virtual cluster and
I create a namespace, what happens on the
host cluster?
I'm assuming you create a namespace there and
there's a mapping between the two, but maybe
I'm wrong.
So let's do this connect command first. And
this is where I'm gonna regret changing the
name of the cluster because now I have
to change all of my commands.
There's a rookie error, but
oh,
I'm not gonna pressure turn on that because
this creates a kube config dot yaml
and I may have one of those.
Do I? It creates it in your local
directory though. Yeah. This is a cluster API
cluster, and I have a KubeCon. Oh, but
not not a YAML. Okay. We should be
okay.
I
was worried I was gonna blow away my
KubeConfig, and that would have been the end
of our session, but we should be alright.
Okay. What do we got? We got a
config written to dot YAML, so we're safe.
We can access the cluster
by using the config
and it started up port forward. So do
I need to leave that port forward running
to interact with the cluster?
Yeah. Okay. Yeah. You're gonna wanna do that.
Come on computer. There we go.
So kip
config.
Look at that.
I mean, that's a bit weird to forget
pods all, but I understand why.
I would be very worried if this was
cluster and that's all I could see, but
this is what we expect, so I'm happy
with that. Well, I'm gonna
create namespace.
I'm gonna try and trip it up just
because I like to do that.
Alright.
So that did work.
Let's run cat names basis.
And I'm gonna do that again on
Yeah. Yeah.
Okay.
So
interesting. It's not what I expected, so maybe
we could dive into that a little bit.
When I create a namespace on the virtual
cluster,
you either don't create it on a host
cluster until I add some workloads to it
or you just don't create it at all.
You wanna dive into that a wee bit?
Yeah. We don't create it at all essentially.
So what we do is we map your
x namespaces inside the vCluster
to the single namespace where the vCluster
state for set is deployed to.
So no matter how many namespaces you create,
all the pods
that you create in these namespaces end up
in the same namespace in the underlying host
cluster.
Of course. Because you can use vCluster when
you only have access to a namespace. I
didn't think of that. You you do confine
everything to that boundary, which makes a lot
of sense. Exactly.
When when you create a name What is
this? That's a request to the k three
s API server, and it's stored in your
SQLite or, you know, etcd or MySQL or
whatever is the back end for your k
three s API server,
and that's it.
Nothing else happens.
Were you gonna say something You
can literally delete that namespace
and everything goes away.
Alright.
So we also got a question from Rio
in the chat, which I think we've just
answered, but I'll throw up anyway and you
can feel free to add any extra flavor
to that as you want. But Rio says,
so a user who deploys vCluster only needs
to have admin role bindings to a single
namespace.
That is correct. Yeah. That's essentially the core
story for for vCluster. As as long as
you can create, you know, a stateful set
and a service inside a namespace, you can
and, I mean, you have to have the
privilege to also do port forwarding if you
wanna connect to the g cluster, obviously.
But other than that, yeah, you don't need
any privileges. So if you have admin role
binding in that particular namespace,
then you can deploy the cluster.
Alright. And Noel has a comment. I'll pop
up, but I think we kinda just answered
that as well. Noel is saying that the
the sinker just manages everything from the vCluster
namespace
back to the host.
Do you wanna talk, Lucas, about which which
objects get synced?
Yeah. So there is essentially
we kind of differentiate a little bit between
you know? And we have a separate docs
page about that as well
regarding
high level and low level resources in Kubernetes.
So we see the lower level resources,
like parts and service,
different from higher abstracted resources like, you know,
deployments or stateful sets or even CRDs. Right?
And what we need to sync is essentially
parts,
services,
and everything that parts need to run. So
let's say you mount a secret. Right?
Then we may need to sync that secret.
Right? Otherwise, we can't mount it.
Or if you mount a config map, it's
the same scenario.
But all the other 500 secrets and config
maps you may have in your vCluster don't
need to be synchronized. So we're pretty selective
in what needs to be synchronized.
But, obviously, we need to synchronize everything that's
required to actually start a certain part,
and we need to synchronize services just so
that we can make networking
between your parts inside the vCluster work and
that they also, you know, can communicate,
you know, via services rather than just on
an IP based level between each other.
Okay. That makes a lot of sense. I
think it really smart that kind of selective
sync based on whether something is is actually
being consumed or used is really clever.
I mean,
is there things that cause problems here? I'm
thinking storage and CSI
plugins
like, I guess, that you have access to
whatever the host has, or is there something
a bit different there?
Yeah. I mean, that's typically I mean, you
can have so, essentially, the vCluster
can have a subset of things that are
available
in your host cluster that depends on the
configuration. Right? So, essentially,
think about it like a storage class. Right?
If we if you were to use a
storage class
and you wanna create
a a persistent volume claim, for example, in
your in your vCluster,
you gotta have that storage class. Otherwise, you
can't use it. Right?
Otherwise, it does it simply doesn't work in
Kubernetes.
And that storage class,
you know, obviously needs to
be
from your underlying host cluster because that's where
that part actually got started.
So you can't just come up with, you
know,
other resources not available in your host cluster
regarding, you know, actual part workloads and volumes,
etcetera.
Alright. That makes makes
a lot of sense.
We got a comment from Rio who's obviously
very excited for their go to custom Docker
and Cain CI setup. So
we've got a we've got a vClusterConvert
already. I'm really half of their end. That's
awesome.
I I do wanna say that we love
kind.
Like, it's an amazing project and it's done
so much for the community.
I definitely think they're you know, vCluster isn't
necessarily
the right tool for every situation, but
but I do really like it for that
CI use case for sure.
Nice.
We got a security question from Noel in
the chat
who is asking whether the KCS API server
runs as a non root.
And they're wondering about potential,
you know, user breaking out of the virtual
cluster into the host cluster and whether that
should be a concern.
That's actually a pretty good question. I'd have
to
look pretty deep in the code myself.
Don't know what the answer to that is.
I assume if you can run it without
root, it would be possible with vCluster as
well.
I don't know if that's it's the default
for us or not.
I guess they're still contained with the the
namespace that vCluster was deployed to as well.
So if you got your Rawk policy Rawkode
policies correct there, you know, it's it's pretty
strict, I would imagine.
I actually Yeah. I assume that have some
is just a single binary as well. So
even if you, you know, were to break
out of the actual process there or something,
you'd end up in a probably, like, distroless
container. I assume that's how k three s
is packaged, but I'd have to look in
how they're packaging things because we are basically
just using, you know, the image off of
Docker Hub. So I don't know if it
runs with the root user or, you know,
what's inside of there.
Yeah. I don't I don't know the the
answer to that question either, but I do
have some friends that are pretty security
minded that we're playing around with it. And
the thing that they emphasized is
the importance of doing admission control,
you know, on the host cluster.
Yeah. That makes a lot of sense too,
definitely.
Okay.
I deterred this a little bit there, so
let's jump back to our Get Started Guides.
So we did the namespace,
we checked that out, we created a namespace.
Now we're gonna deploy our first workload to
our virtual
cluster.
So I'll need to change this a little
bit.
Oh,
it's the namespace.
Oh yeah. Because I decided just to trick
it.
See
and then the image. Okay.
Awesome. So we should be able to run
get pods all namespaces.
And we have an NGINX pod being spun
up and a Rawkode live namespace inside a
Rawkode live virtual cluster inside a Rawkode live
namespace.
Easy.
It's a lot of Rawkode live going on
here. Yeah. I'm I'm starting to Rawkode live
inception.
There's a lot of inception vibes going on
here, that's for sure.
So let's run.
I just like seeing what happens on my
host. I'm assuming based on all the conversation
we've had now is what I expect to
see is in my Rawkode live host namespace.
There to be a pod that's potentially called
Rawkode live Rawkode live Rawkode live.
Because it would be namespace vClusterName
and pod.
That sound right?
Yeah. Pretty much. That should be what it
was looking like. Yeah.
Oh, we don't wanna do all namespaces here.
We wanna see
here.
Oh, no. Okay. So I never called my
engine x deployment Rawkode live. I should have.
I missed the trick. But we got Rawkode
live, Rawkode live. There you go.
That is cool. I like that.
And
yeah. So
the secret sauce is the sinker. Right? The
sinker is the one that does all of
the magic here. It feels to me like
there's so many there could be more applications
to this sinker than maybe just virtual clusters.
Like, I'm thinking maybe cluster federation
or disaster recovery and being able to copy
stuff over.
It feels like that could be applied in
actually maybe a couple of different ways.
Yeah. It's actually pretty crazy.
Again, I mean, since we it's even crazier
since we open source vCluster,
but even before as part of the commercial
product, it's crazy what people, you know, come
up with in terms of ideas. And
so far, you know, we started with essentially
virtual clusters as
a way to, you know, give extra privileges
to users that are confined to a namespace,
typically.
But then the next question is is the
one that that you are asking
that that a couple of folks have asked
us as well is, you know, can't we
back
at vCluster
by different
physical clusters. Right? It's a super interesting thought
because the syncer, I mean, basically, just wants
to keep CTL apply command. Right? You know,
technically. I mean, obviously, it's using client go,
etcetera.
But
that's what happens under the hood, and
it could technically, you know, route different parts
to different clusters in a way or, you
know, sync them to, like, five clusters in
parallel. You know, they're they're essentially unlimited possibilities
here, and it's super exciting to explore those
use cases. But so far,
that's not a main priority.
Awesome.
Okay. So we can clean up our vCluster
now using vCluster delete,
or is there a few things that we
should kick the tires on before we do
that?
What else does the vCustr CLI Yeah. Do?
Right. Doesn't do a whole lot more. I
mean, you can upgrade the the vCustr CLI.
Right?
Other than that, it's really just create, connect,
delete.
I guess that's all you needed to do.
So nice.
Alright.
What should we do over a virtual cluster?
Do have any
any cool things that you normally deploy to
this?
Yeah. I think one thing on the checkout
is essentially what happens with the nodes.
You you do have a multi node cluster.
Right?
Yeah. We've got a control plane node in
two workers.
Yeah.
Alright. We we could check out, you know,
what happened what happened with our part. Do
we see nodes inside the vCluster?
That is typically what a lot of users
are interested in because that's a it's it's
a non obvious question. Right?
What what happens there?
Yeah. We actually we we touched on that,
and then I forgot
oh, no. That's named spaces.
No. It's
Alright. So I see
both the workers and the control plane is
removed. I guess this is the the default
configuration
for how to expose the notes.
I think the default right now is we
actually changed the default recently. I think the
default as of today
is that we show you the notes
that are actually
that you have workloads running on.
So your pods get scheduled by the underlying
cluster,
and I assume
that you have two parts, you know, at
least or, like, one part on each one
of these nodes, but not one on the
other one. Probably because you have some kind
of thing there
that doesn't allow parts to be scheduled.
Yeah. We got our core DNS on one
of the nodes. We got NGINX on the
other. And I actually
removed the tint from the control play notes,
so we had three to play with. So
I guess that means
that I could do an edit deployment
engine x.
What do we call that?
A demo engine x.
Oh, there's a namespace involved too.
But did I change again?
I'm gonna have to have a word with
myself. Alright.
Okay. You need to learn the power of
copy and Copy. Yeah. Copy and paste, David.
I know.
I'm just gonna scale up.
See if we can get Yeah. That onto
the control plane node, run the get nodes.
I I like
I like that it kinda tries to work
out which
which nodes it has to expose. I can
imagine
in a scenario where I've got my host
clusters running on twenty, thirty, a hundred nodes,
whatever that is and people have access to
vClusters. You know, you're you're really restricting the
scope to what they need to see or
they have the ability to see rather than
just giving them a map of the world
and going, here, here's all the things that
we've got available to you.
Yeah. It's actually quite interesting. I mean, we
we already talked about, you know, mutating admission
control earlier inside the host cluster.
And what you can essentially do in inside
the host cluster, you can, you know, enforce
certain notes for certain users with mutating admission
control,
you know, essentially just on a pod level
for you don't need to avoid about a
whole lot of other resources. You essentially just
worry about the parts. And then, you know,
you essentially,
you know, rewrite these
parts that the synchronizes
down,
and that way you can essentially restrict notes
as well for you know, although you don't
add anything to the vCluster just by adding
admission control to your underlying cluster.
Okay. I like this.
So what you were saying sorry, Andy. Go
Rich.
Oh, I was just gonna say I'm I'm
with Noel. Noel mentioned in the chat that
he's adding it to the log list of
tools to check out. I I know that
field.
Yeah.
The the cloud native landscape just seems to
continue to grow at an
absolute wild rate. There's just so many cool
technologies coming out, solving
a whole array of really cool problems. It's
it's phenomenal to watch. Yeah.
Yeah. One of the reasons that I was
really interested in coming to Loft is that,
like, I just know that people have felt
a lot of pain, you know, over
over multitenancy
and self-service
and that these things are
really big issues for people's productivity,
you know, for the engineers and and for
the platform teams and and people who are
supporting them too. You know? And
you used the word clever earlier to describe
something about the design, and I I think
that
I think the tools are smart. You know?
I think vCluster is a smart tool that
solves real problems.
Definitely.
So
something's crossed my mind though and I'm gonna
throw it out there.
I just ran get nodes on the host
and we've seen the control plane and the
two workers. Apparently my ability to remove a
taint is
well, as crap as everything else I've done
so far, but
the age on my host nodes is seventy
minutes and fifty minutes.
The age on the second worker node and
the vCluster is probably from when we deployed
engine x.
So that's something that the KCS cluster
is registering is actually registering the node with
KCS
when something gets scheduled there?
Yeah. That's that's exactly what happens.
You also see that the the the version
shows k three s as well. Right? Well,
that was my next question. Like, can I
deploy one two one as a vCluster? Can
I drop down to one sixteen? Like, can
I get really weird testing situations running across
multiple Kubernetes versions regardless of what my host
cluster is?
Yes. You can. I think the only limitation
that you have is the pod spec. Right?
Because we're synchronizing your pods. So if there
is a feature
if you're using a vCluster of a higher
version than your host cluster,
and you're using a pod spec feature that
is not available in your underlying cluster, and
that is one of the fields that we're
syncing,
so an essential field. Right?
Then that may lead to a problem.
But then you're just transparently gonna see it
in that in the status. Right?
So
you can get around these these things. And
typically, you know, pop and service, which are
the core things that we're synchronizing,
they're rather stable. You know, taking the Kubernetes
API, not a whole lot of things are
changing. You know? Whereas things like, you know,
ingress or, obviously, I mean, CRDs change even
more frequently.
That's typically the things that that would break
a lot more. But, yeah, people are doing
that. People run entirely different k three s
versions
on top of, you know, other
Kubernetes versions, and that's actually one part where
it's super interesting for CICD as well. Right?
If you wanna test, like, 20 versions of
Kubernetes at once. Right? You just spin up
twenty week. That's just really quick.
Yeah. One of the one of the use
cases we didn't talk about is testing upgrades.
You know?
Yeah.
Yeah. You could actually
do that in a pretty safe manner, I
guess, by
rolling things out to a vCluster first,
seeing what happens, and then going, alright. It
looks good or oh, crap. Oops. Things went
wrong. And then, yeah, you got to stay
in a nice, safe, and secure way of
handling that. That's pretty cool use case as
well. Yeah. I mean, again, if, you know,
like Lucas was saying, you know, if you're
if you're doing CICD against a specific version
of Kubernetes,
you know, you could do a scenario where,
you know, you run the test against both
for a little bit, you know, and make
sure that that, you know, the newer one
is working as well.
Okay. But I'm curious about this version thing
there.
Is this the flag I need? I just
specify the KCS image, and that's the version
of Kubernetes I get in my my virtual
cluster?
Yeah. That's pretty much what works. Yeah. You
can also
I mean, if you're looking at the documentation
and you see, you know, the the cube
CTL deployment option and the Helm deployment option,
how these things actually get passed on. The
CLI is basically just, you know, running
Helm install or Helm upgrade on the hood
essentially and passing those things to the to
the helm chart. And the helm chart is
basically just adding that to the there's a
extra arcs
that you can pass, and they essentially get
concatenated,
you know, to the regular arcs that we
pass in k three s.
We don't need docs. I've got you too.
Alright. I'm just I'm so curious to have
this multi this version thing that I
need to try it. So how old can
I get? Let's see. No.
KCS is now old. There we go.
Let's try this.
What are what's your host cluster?
120.four.
So yeah, could I think I'll create a
116 and a 121 just for no other
real reason that I think it's cool that
I can do that. Like that is this
very exciting to me and I don't know
why but
go.
I'll grab the 121,
which is I think the latest is 1212.
Yeah. There we go.
Too much fun. That's what I'm saying.
One thing I also wanna mention is you
always change the namespace here.
It's also possible to have multiple vCluster in
the same
namespace.
That's technically possible as well. Typically, we recommend,
you know, for easier visibility in what actually
is happening under the hood to isolate them
with the namespaces,
certainly possible.
I'm just sitting here popping up Kubernetes clusters
like nobody's business and having a rare time.
So
It's it's also possible to run a vCluster
inside of a vCluster,
which I actually did a YouTube video where
we do that on the loft YouTube. It's
pretty fun.
What?
So you've got a vCluster running on a
host cluster. You create a vCluster and a
vCluster and the sync just goes to the
sinker and the sinker goes back to the
host cluster. So it's just two layers of
how many how many have you tried? How
deep if you went, Rich?
I've only done the
the
that second layer.
I mean, I'm gonna have to try it.
So
alright. So this is I'm gonna get so
confused and forget where I am, but I'm
I'm gonna this is me on VCluster 1,
and now I'm gonna create another vCluster called
VCluster
5.
Okay.
Looks like it may be working.
Okay. Let's see what happens when I do
a list. So this is inside of VCluster
1 and we have access to V Cluster
5.
If anyone at home is actually managing to
keep sense of this, you're much better than
I am.
I'm gonna unset my kube config which puts
me back on the host.
I don't want to be in the host.
I want to be on my
remote cluster.
Okay.
I may need ten or twenty minutes to
work this out. So
vCluster less connect took me a while to
work it out when I made the video.
So this is really cool. I have four
clusters on
bare metal right now.
I shouldn't do an all because there's too
much running. Let's do
this.
Oh, man. We should have made it VM
on the bare metal
to run the vCluster's inside.
The one sixteen failed, but we'll ignore that.
We got our engine x's.
In fact, I think I just got all
those images wrong. I've I've I've I think
I've now got five broken clusters, don't I?
Oh, I'm an idiot.
You see when you when you know, you
know.
This is just a tag.
Oh, yeah.
You wanna use what Alright. Yeah. When
we did the get nodes, right?
I guess it should be rancher slash k
t s and then
the tag.
Oh, okay.
Yeah. Don't don't worry about it. Just run
it again. It'll essentially run Helm upgrade.
Oh, nice.
Okay. So we can run The only thing
only thing to note is because they're stateful
sets, the parts actually don't get recreated.
You'll have to delete the parts, but then
they get, you know, the new parts that
will be scheduled.
They will essentially have the new image.
Okay. So let's see if we can upgrade
and fix the broken image on Rawkode Live
two,
and we'll try and get a one twenty
one cluster of this.
Yeah. So there's a home upgrade,
which means I should be able to
run this. And you said I might just
have to
Yeah. You see that there's still three minutes
old or oh, no. That one actually got
recreate. Oh, I think if the image is
changing, yeah, then then restarts
it.
Yeah. It's running. Okay.
Let me recreate my five clusters again in
under one minute.
One 16.
Oh, that could suit. Okay. They added change
the image for that. So let's do rancher
case. Yes. And this can be cluster three.
And I'm so confused.
Now I wanna connect to vCluster
and create another cluster for cluster inception.
VCluster.
Oh no, my connect's up here, right? Yeah.
Cool.
And this one will do
five
and yeah, so we'll just do that. Okay.
I have no idea how many v clusters
I've got anymore, but we definitely have some
virtual clusters.
So we can do a v cluster list.
We'll connect it to the current v cluster
and we can run get pods all and
this is a vCluster so we should only
see
apparently that's oh no, this will need me
to delete the pod because
Juggling too many things, but we'll get there.
This should just not be this much fun.
I mean, I have to say that's been
my reaction the whole time since I started
playing with this project is is
I just think it's super fun. And
a lot of what we do, you know,
as ops people and platform engineers and and,
product engineers
isn't necessarily fun. So so my theory is
that you embrace
the things you can do that are. Right?
So if you get to play with a
tool that, you know, is really fun that
you enjoy, you know, run with that if
you can.
Couldn't agree more.
Alright. Let's confirm our version of Spark and
then I'll stop doing silly things, I promise.
But we have
a connect here and we're gonna connect to
vCluster
two which I think is a one twenty
one cluster.
So I should hopefully still be on.
There we go. We got a one twenty
one cluster running on a one twenty cluster.
That's pretty sweet.
That's awesome.
It is.
I wanted to thank Noel too who said
in the chat that he enjoyed that video
that I was talking about on YouTube. I
I appreciate that.
Thanks. Awesome.
And no one now suggesting that on custard,
everyone's gonna be getting a nested vCluster.
Potentially. Pretty nice way of doing it. I'm
not I'm not sure if that would be
fair but
Alright. Yeah. This
this is really cool.
That version thing was a nice little cherry
on the top there as we went through
this. I wasn't expecting really I mean,
now that I've done it, I'm like, well
yeah, of course we could do something like
that but it just it doesn't occur to
me and now that I know I can
have multiple versions of Kubernetes API available,
even just building operators and being able to
run end to end test against all of
these versions and do that super quickly,
I guess,
guess, that's really nice. I like that completely.
Awesome. There's one more topic that may be
interesting, and that's actually networking.
The reason, you know, why networking
for in cluster stuff works
out of the box is essentially because the
pods are running actually on your host cluster.
Right?
So they use your regular,
you know, network plug in that you're using
for for your your host Kubernetes cluster.
And then
what we do essentially inside the vCluster is
we just you know, because we're syncing the
services, but we're also renaming them, again, to
prevent naming conflicts because, again, we're mapping from
five namespaces to a single host namespace. Right?
The only thing we need to do is
adjust the cluster internal DNS
and tell these parts to talk to the
DNS server
that is running inside our vCluster, which also
creates part on the underlying cluster so you
can basically also connect to it via regular
IP.
Sounds a little tricky, but, essentially,
again, networking so in cluster networking, so connecting
to any services inside your vClusterWorks.
And you can also, you know, immediately
talk to other parts via IP. And the
really interesting part is actually regarding
ingresses.
Because,
you know, frequent use case
is that you you don't want every one
of your if you're in that use case
that we originally come from. Right? You have,
like, users in their isolated namespaces.
Typically, they share
an ingress controller. Right? Or they have, like,
couple of them available in the cluster.
If you're using vCluster,
you don't want everyone to deploy their own
NGINX and have to, you know, provision their
own load balance servers.
That's right. It's a little bit more tricky.
So by default,
vCluster's
also synchronize
ingresses,
but that can also be, you know, turned
off and on, etcetera.
Okay. Yeah. That makes sense as well.
Does that mean
if I say I bypass the DNS within
the cluster, I just start using port IP
addresses.
That that network isn't going to work. Right?
No. That network works. So, I mean, your
part is so if you're inside the part,
right, if you were to just run Kube
CDL exec inside a part that you deployed
via the vCluster,
then you're technically not then you're technically inside
a part of your host cluster. Right?
And if you were to ping another part
in your host cluster with the with that
IP, that should work unless your network policy
is forbidding you to do that.
Some interesting use cases there.
I'm thinking like as me as operator of
the host cluster, I can actually make some
things available
to vClusters using
the host networking thing. Like I could say
here's a http service that's gonna give you
access to secrets
or metadata or something and then they just
know this magic IP address or whatever is
is gonna work. I'm
not sure what Yeah. A real world actually
is there yet, but there's that there's something
Yeah. No.
It's it's funny that you mentioned it. That's
actually one of the most requested features for
vCluster is because
what you described right now
is what we recommend as a workaround. Right?
So we have the common use case that
you have, like, a very bulky application
or kind of like a test system or
something that people need to connect to. Right?
Just think of, like, you have a as
a, you know, cluster admin, wanna, you know,
make a
Kafka cluster available for your engineers. Right? I
think that is one of the use cases
that one of the one of our customers,
you know, was outlining, and they don't want
everybody to deploy their own Kafka cluster because
they're pretty bulky. Right?
They tend to break, and it it's very
high maintenance. And they're already inherently multi tenant.
Right? So they can essentially with different credentials,
manage different users. So why not one central
instance
and make it available to your engineers? Right?
And then the question is,
how does your pod
that you created in your vCluster now connect
to that service?
Because that service of that Kafka cluster does
not exist in your vCluster.
There's essentially
two answers to that. One is if you
have a IP which is not supposed to
change frequently, right, because you created that service
for a Kafka cluster,
then you can direct directly, of course, com
communicate VIP.
And the workaround would be to essentially
just create that service inside the vCluster.
So essentially, one of cube CTL apply to
create that service
to kind of have, like, a fake service
inside your vCluster.
That is something
that works right now, but we're thinking about
other ways, you know, when, obviously, operators
wanna, you know, enable for the engineers is
a more automated approach to this. Right? But
they don't need to play around with things
like that.
So we're currently thinking about ways to synchronize
resources from the host cluster
back into the vCluster essentially so that services
start popping up that you have not created
in the vCluster, but you want them, you
know, to be synchronized from the host cluster
into the vCluster. That would be a use
case. Yeah. I was just thinking that. Like,
if I could label my Kafka servers on
a host cluster in some way that associates
it with the vClusters and then the sync
will create those services for me, that would
be a a pretty
pretty interesting setup as well.
Yeah.
So this is open source. It's on GitHub,
you know, GitHub.com/loft-sh/vCluster.
And, you know, we have been getting some
issues for people. People are kicking the tires
a little bit, and it's really exciting.
You just can't predict what people are gonna
wanna do, you know, until you throw something
out in the wild like this.
Nice.
Alright.
Let's clean this up.
I'm assuming this is gonna be really really
simple.
And I have no idea what you configure
them on anymore, so let's work that out.
Okay, that's good. So let's go back to
this one.
VCluster
delete.
Copy
and paste, Dave. That's the future.
Stop changing stuff.
Yeah. Since everything is contained inside
those namespaces,
so the vCluster itself, right, the stateful set
and the service as well as
the workloads that run inside the vCluster, it's
actually really easy to purge a vCluster. You
can just delete the namespace.
Yeah. So you could literally, on your host
namespace, delete
or on your host delete those namespaces.
Done.
All gone.
Yeah. That was much easier. I was going
to go vCluster delete and work my way
through them all. But, yeah, I can just
remove that whole namespace.
And that's that's the the great thing about
vCluster is I only need the namespace and
I can clean it up with just the
namespace. That's
very cool.
Alright. Is there anything else? I know I
haven't
really stuck to the documentation too much, but
is there anything else that we wanna go
through before we finish up for today?
Maybe just a quick
shout out to what Fabian has been working,
our CTO at Loft Labs. He's been spending
a lot of time on this. You see
that they're operator guide monitoring and metrics.
He's been spending a lot of time on,
you know, actually making things like cube CTL
top work. So, essentially, you know, having the
capability to deploy metrics server inside your vCluster
and then hook up monitoring
via Prometheus and stuff like that. So that's
really moving more from, you know, the depth
stage towards staging environments,
production setups,
because they're very interesting use cases in that
space as well, and we'd like to explore
them further. But, obviously, we need to provide
some more, you know, tooling for operators to
gain confidence that they can actually, you know,
run that, you know, in in staging and
production scenarios,
you know, because without monitoring and and metrics
and things like that, that would not be
possible or not recommend that.
Very cool. Yeah. Yeah. Hadn't even considered those
kind of day one, day two things, but
it's nice that those are being worked on.
Yeah.
The tool is very rapidly changing.
Fabian's amazing, like we mentioned.
Just wanna thank to, you know, the folks
who have been, like, kicking the tires on
this thing and and giving us feedback. It's
so helpful. If if folks watching the stream,
you know, play around with vCluster, we'd we'd
love to hear about what you do.
Nice.
Alright.
Well, that was a whole lot of fun.
I'm I'm still a little bit shocked at
the simplicity and how easy it was to
really get everything started.
You know, you said at the start using
the vCluster CLI is just gonna make things
a lot easier.
Yeah. It was easy. Really, really easy.
And the speed I wish you can spin
up and shut down those virtual clusters is
a sight to behold. So thank you both
for for joining me and and guiding us
to the session. That that was a lot
of fun. I really enjoyed that.
Do you Thank you, David.
Do you have any
final words or anything you would like to
share with the audience before we say goodbye?
I I just reiterate what I said. You
know, if you if you kick the tires,
please please do let us know.
I'm at rich Burrows on Twitter.
At me. I'd love to hear about what
you do with vCluster.
Awesome.
And definitely check out the kube cuddle podcast.
Lots of fun there.
Alright. I will put links to all of
this in the show notes. Feel free to
play with vCluster,
reach out to Rich if you have some
fun, let him know if anything breaks. I'm
sure they'll be very happy to to help
you. As well based on the things we
were doing today, it's probably gonna take quite
a lot to break a vCluster.
But like I said, I had a lot
of fun. Thank you again for joining me
and I hope you both have a wonderful
day. Thanks again. You too.
Thank you.